docs/src/postgres-permissions.md, before:

# Postgres permissions for PgOSM Flex

The [quick start](quick-start.md) section showed how to get up and
running using the Postgres instance within the PgOSM Flex docker image.
Many production usage cases of PgOSM Flex prefer to connect the
PgOSM Flex processing within Docker directly to an already running
Postgres instances.


The first step to using PgOSM Flex with your own Postgres instance
is to have a database already created, and a login role with
proper permissions.
The steps in this page prepare for the steps outlined
in the [Using External Postgres Connection](postgres-external.md)
section.

## Create database and PostGIS

These first steps require elevated permissions within Postgres.
`CREATE DATABASE` requires the `CREATEDB` permission.
Creating the PostGIS extension requires
[Postgres superuser permissions](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/12/postgis-permissions-required).

In the target Postgres instance, create your database.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE your_db_name;
```

Connect to `your_db_name` and create the PostGIS extension.
This is done along with the `CREATE DATABASE` since both steps
require the superuser role. 


```sql
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;
```



## Runtime permissions

Your target database needs to have an `osm` schema and the database user
requires the ability to create and populate tables in `osm`.

The following commands show one approach to granting permissions
required for PgOSM Flex to run on an external database.
Do not simply run this assuming this is the proper approach
for your database security!



```sql
CREATE ROLE pgosm_flex WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'mysecretpassword';
CREATE SCHEMA osm AUTHORIZATION pgosm_flex;
GRANT CREATE ON DATABASE your_db_name
    TO pgosm_flex;
```

These permissions should allow the full PgOSM Flex process to run.


`GRANT CREATE` is required to allow the sqitch process to run and create the `pgosm` schema.



## Reduced permissions

`GRANT CREATE` gives the `pgosm_flex` role far more permissions than
it really needs in many cases. 
Running `docker exec` with `--data-only` skips these steps and would make the `GRANT CREATE` permission unnecessary for the `pgosm_flex` role.

It also is often desired to not make
a login role the owner of database objects. This example reduces the
scope of permissions.


```sql
CREATE ROLE pgosm_flex;
CREATE SCHEMA osm AUTHORIZATION pgosm_flex;
GRANT pgosm_flex TO your_login_role;
```

Commit message:

Update permission docs for changes with Pg 15 permissions on public schema

docs/src/postgres-permissions.md, after:

# Postgres permissions for PgOSM Flex

The [quick start](quick-start.md) section showed how to get up and
running using the Postgres instance within the PgOSM Flex docker image.
Many production usage cases of PgOSM Flex prefer to connect the
PgOSM Flex processing within Docker directly to an already running
Postgres instances.


The first step to using PgOSM Flex with your own Postgres instance
is to have a database already created, and a login role with
proper permissions.
The steps in this page prepare for the steps outlined
in the [Using External Postgres Connection](postgres-external.md)
section.

## Create database and PostGIS

These first steps require elevated permissions within Postgres.
`CREATE DATABASE` requires the `CREATEDB` permission.
Creating the PostGIS extension requires
[Postgres superuser permissions](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/12/postgis-permissions-required).

In the target Postgres instance, create your database.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE your_db_name;
```

Connect to `your_db_name` and create the PostGIS extension.
This is done along with the `CREATE DATABASE` since both steps
require the superuser role. 


```sql
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;
```



## Runtime permissions

Your target database needs to have an `osm` schema and the database user
requires the ability to create and populate tables in `osm`.

The following commands show one approach to granting permissions
required for PgOSM Flex to run on an external database.
Do not simply run this assuming this is the proper approach
for your database security!



```sql
CREATE ROLE pgosm_flex WITH LOGIN PASSWORD 'mysecretpassword';
CREATE SCHEMA osm AUTHORIZATION pgosm_flex;
GRANT CREATE ON DATABASE your_db_name
    TO pgosm_flex;
GRANT CREATE ON SCHEMA public
    TO pgosm_flex;
```

These permissions should allow the full PgOSM Flex process to run.

`GRANT CREATE ON DATABASE` is required to allow the sqitch process to run and create the `pgosm` schema.

`GRANT CREATE ON SCHEMA public` is required for Postgres 15 and newer.


## Reduced permissions

`GRANT CREATE` gives the `pgosm_flex` role far more permissions than
it really needs in many cases. 
Running `docker exec` with `--data-only` skips these steps and would make the `GRANT CREATE` permission unnecessary for the `pgosm_flex` role.

It also is often desired to not make
a login role the owner of database objects. This example reduces the
scope of permissions.


```sql
CREATE ROLE pgosm_flex;
CREATE SCHEMA osm AUTHORIZATION pgosm_flex;
GRANT pgosm_flex TO your_login_role;
```
