docs/src/quick-start.md, before:

# Quick Start



See the [Docker Usage](#docker-usage) section below for an explanation of
these commands.

```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
export POSTGRES_USER=postgres
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword

# Ensure you have the latest Docker image
docker pull rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex

docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_USER=$POSTGRES_USER \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex

docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia
```



## PgOSM via Docker

The PgOSM Flex
[Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex)
is hosted on Docker Hub.
The image includes all the pre-requisite software and handles all of the options,
logic, an post-processing steps required.  Features include:

* Automatic data download from Geofabrik and validation against checksum
* Custom Flex layers built in Lua
* Mix and match layers using Layersets
* Loads to Docker-internal Postgres, or externally defined Postgres
* Supports `osm2pgsql-replication` and `osm2pgsql --append` mode
* Export processed data via `pg_dump` for loading into additional databases


## Docker usage

This section outlines a typical import using Docker to run PgOSM Flex.

### Prepare

Create directory for the `.osm.pbf` file and output `.sql` file. These files
are automatically created by PgOSM Flex.


```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
```

### Run

Set environment variables for the temporary Postgres connection in Docker.
These are required for the Docker container to run.


```bash
export POSTGRES_USER=postgres
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword
```

Start the `pgosm` Docker container. At this point, Postgres / PostGIS
is available on port `5433`.

```bash
docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex
```

### Check Docker container running

It is worth verifying the Docker container is successfully running with `docker ps -a`.
Check for a `STATUS` similar to `Up 4 seconds` shown in the example output below.

```bash
$ docker ps -a

CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                      COMMAND                  CREATED         STATUS         PORTS                                       NAMES
e7f80926a823   rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex   "docker-entrypoint.s…"   5 seconds ago   Up 4 seconds   0.0.0.0:5433->5432/tcp, :::5433->5432/tcp   pgosm
```


### Execute PgOSM Flex

Use `docker exec` to run the processing for the Washington D.C subregion.
This example uses three (3) parameters to specify the total system RAM (8 GB)
along with a region/subregion.

* Total RAM for osm2pgsql, Postgres and OS (`8`)
* Region (`north-america/us`)
* Sub-region (`district-of-columbia`) (Optional)


```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia
```


The above command takes roughly 1 minute to run if the PBF for today
has already been downloaded.
If the PBF is not downloaded it will depend on how long
it takes to download the 17 MB PBF file + ~ 1 minute processing.


## After processing

The processed OpenStreetMap data is also available in the Docker container on port `5433`.
You can connect and query directly in the Docker container.

```bash
psql -h localhost -p 5433 -d pgosm -U postgres -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM osm.road_line;"

┌───────┐
│ count │
╞═══════╡
│ 39865 │
└───────┘
```


The `~/pgosm-data` directory has two (2) files from a typical single run.
The PBF file and its MD5 checksum have been renamed with the date in the filename.
This enables loading the file downloaded today 
again in the future, either with the same version of PgOSM Flex or the latest version. The `docker exec` command uses the `PGOSM_DATE` environment variable
to load these historic files.


If `--pg-dump` option is used the output `.sql` is also saved in
the `~/pgosm-data` directory.
This `.sql` file can be loaded into any other database with PostGIS and the proper
permissions.


```bash
ls -alh ~/pgosm-data/

-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root      18M Jan 21 03:45 district-of-columbia-2023-01-21.osm.pbf
-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root       70 Jan 21 04:39 district-of-columbia-2023-01-21.osm.pbf.md5
-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root     163M Jan 21 16:14 north-america-us-district-of-columbia-default-2023-01-21.sql
```



## Meta table

PgOSM Flex tracks processing metadata in the ``osm.pgosm_flex``  table. The initial import
has `osm2pgsql_mode = 'create'`, the subsequent update has
`osm2pgsql_mode = 'append'`. 


```sql
SELECT osm_date, region, srid,
        pgosm_flex_version, osm2pgsql_version, osm2pgsql_mode
    FROM osm.pgosm_flex
;
```

```bash
┌────────────┬───────────────────────────┬──────┬────────────────────┬───────────────────┬────────────────┐
│  osm_date  │          region           │ srid │ pgosm_flex_version │ osm2pgsql_version │ osm2pgsql_mode │
╞════════════╪═══════════════════════════╪══════╪════════════════════╪═══════════════════╪════════════════╡
│ 2022-11-04 │ north-america/us-colorado │ 3857 │ 0.6.2-e1f140f      │ 1.7.2             │ create         │
│ 2022-11-25 │ north-america/us-colorado │ 3857 │ 0.6.2-e1f140f      │ 1.7.2             │ append         │
└────────────┴───────────────────────────┴──────┴────────────────────┴───────────────────┴────────────────┘
```



## Explore data loaded

A peek at some of the tables loaded.
This query requires the
[PostgreSQL Data Dictionary (PgDD) extension](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgdd),
use `\dt+ osm.*` in `psql` for similar details.


```sql
SELECT s_name, t_name, rows, size_plus_indexes 
    FROM dd.tables 
    WHERE s_name = 'osm' 
    ORDER BY t_name LIMIT 10;
```

```bash
    ┌────────┬──────────────────────┬────────┬───────────────────┐
    │ s_name │        t_name        │  rows  │ size_plus_indexes │
    ╞════════╪══════════════════════╪════════╪═══════════════════╡
    │ osm    │ amenity_line         │      7 │ 56 kB             │
    │ osm    │ amenity_point        │   5796 │ 1136 kB           │
    │ osm    │ amenity_polygon      │   7593 │ 3704 kB           │
    │ osm    │ building_point       │    525 │ 128 kB            │
    │ osm    │ building_polygon     │ 161256 │ 55 MB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_line          │      1 │ 40 kB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_point         │      5 │ 40 kB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_polygon       │    288 │ 136 kB            │
    │ osm    │ infrastructure_point │    884 │ 216 kB            │
    │ osm    │ landuse_point        │     18 │ 56 kB             │
    └────────┴──────────────────────┴────────┴───────────────────┘
```






## One table to rule them all

From the perspective of database design, the `osm.unitable` option is the **worst**!
This table violates all sorts of best practices established in this project
by shoving all features into a single unstructured table.

> This style included in PgOSM Flex is intended to be used for troubleshooting and quality control.  It is not intended to be used for real production workloads! This table is helpful for exploring the full data set when you don't really know what you are looking for, but you know **where** you are looking.

Unitable is loaded with the `everything` layerset.  Feel free to create your own
customized layerset if needed.



```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia \
    --layerset=everything
```


> The `unitable.lua` script include in in this project was [adapted from the unitable example from osm2pgsql](https://github.com/openstreetmap/osm2pgsql/blob/master/flex-config/unitable.lua). This version uses JSONB instead of HSTORE and takes advantage of `helpers.lua` to easily customize SRID.


## JSONB support

PgOSM-Flex uses `JSONB` in Postgres to store the raw OpenStreetMap
key/value data (`tags` column) and relation members (`member_ids`).
The `tags` column only exists in the `osm.tags` and `osm.unitable` tables.
The `member_ids` column is included in:

* `osm.place_polygon`
* `osm.poi_polygon`
* `osm.public_transport_line`
* `osm.public_transport_polygon`
* `osm.road_line`
* `osm.road_major`
* `osm.road_polygon`



## Additional resources


Blog posts covering various details and background information.

* [Book Release! Mastering PostGIS and OpenStreetMap](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2022/10/announce-mastering-postgis-openstreemap)
* [Better OpenStreetMap places in PostGIS](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/01/pgosm-flex-improved-openstreetmap-places-postgis)
* [Improved OpenStreetMap data structure in PostGIS](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/01/postgis-openstreetmap-flex-structure) 
* [Hands on with osm2pgsql's new Flex output](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2020/12/osm2gpsql-flex-output-to-postgis).

Commit message:

Initial Windows instructions with Docker desktop. Fix typos Julie identified

docs/src/quick-start.md, after:

# Quick Start

The bulk of the PgOSM Flex user guide is written for `*nix` users.
The Quick Start, however, includes an additional section [Running on Windows](./windows.md)
provides guidance for Windows users.  Windows users are advised to read
this section before continuing to the Windows specific steps, as many concepts
are not repeated in the Windows instructions.


## TLDR;

The following code block shows the commands needed to run PgOSM Flex.
The sections below provide explanations of these commands.

```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
export POSTGRES_USER=postgres
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword

# Ensure you have the latest Docker image
docker pull rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex

docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_USER=$POSTGRES_USER \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex

docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia
```



## PgOSM via Docker

The PgOSM Flex
[Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex)
is hosted on Docker Hub.
The image includes all the pre-requisite software and handles all of the options,
logic, and post-processing steps required.  Features include:

* Automatic data download from Geofabrik and validation against checksum
* Custom Flex layers built in Lua
* Mix and match layers using Layersets
* Loads to Docker-internal Postgres, or externally defined Postgres
* Supports `osm2pgsql-replication` and `osm2pgsql --append` mode
* Export processed data via `pg_dump` for loading into additional databases


## Docker usage

This section outlines a typical import using Docker to run PgOSM Flex.

### Prepare

Create directory for the `.osm.pbf` file and output `.sql` file. These files
are automatically created by PgOSM Flex.


```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
```

### Run

Set environment variables for the temporary Postgres connection in Docker.
These are required for the Docker container to run.


```bash
export POSTGRES_USER=postgres
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword
```

Start the `pgosm` Docker container. At this point, Postgres / PostGIS
is available on port `5433`.

```bash
docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex
```

### Check Docker container running

It is worth verifying the Docker container is successfully running with `docker ps -a`.
Check for a `STATUS` similar to `Up 4 seconds` shown in the example output below.

```bash
$ docker ps -a

CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                      COMMAND                  CREATED         STATUS         PORTS                                       NAMES
e7f80926a823   rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex   "docker-entrypoint.s…"   5 seconds ago   Up 4 seconds   0.0.0.0:5433->5432/tcp, :::5433->5432/tcp   pgosm
```


### Execute PgOSM Flex

Use `docker exec` to run the processing for the Washington D.C subregion.
This example uses three (3) parameters to specify the total system RAM (8 GB)
along with a region/subregion.

* Total RAM for osm2pgsql, Postgres and OS (`8`)
* Region (`north-america/us`)
* Sub-region (`district-of-columbia`) (Optional)


```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia
```


The above command takes roughly 1 minute to run if the PBF for today
has already been downloaded.
If the PBF is not downloaded it will depend on how long
it takes to download the 17 MB PBF file + ~ 1 minute processing.


## After processing

The processed OpenStreetMap data is also available in the Docker container on port `5433`.
You can connect and query directly in the Docker container.

```bash
psql -h localhost -p 5433 -d pgosm -U postgres -c "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM osm.road_line;"

┌───────┐
│ count │
╞═══════╡
│ 39865 │
└───────┘
```


The `~/pgosm-data` directory has two (2) files from a typical single run.
The PBF file and its MD5 checksum have been renamed with the date in the filename.
This enables loading the file downloaded today 
again in the future, either with the same version of PgOSM Flex or the latest version. The `docker exec` command uses the `PGOSM_DATE` environment variable
to load these historic files.


If `--pg-dump` option is used the output `.sql` is also saved in
the `~/pgosm-data` directory.
This `.sql` file can be loaded into any other database with PostGIS and the proper
permissions.


```bash
ls -alh ~/pgosm-data/

-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root      18M Jan 21 03:45 district-of-columbia-2023-01-21.osm.pbf
-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root       70 Jan 21 04:39 district-of-columbia-2023-01-21.osm.pbf.md5
-rw-r--r-- 1 root     root     163M Jan 21 16:14 north-america-us-district-of-columbia-default-2023-01-21.sql
```



## Meta table

PgOSM Flex tracks processing metadata in the ``osm.pgosm_flex``  table. The initial import
has `osm2pgsql_mode = 'create'`, the subsequent update has
`osm2pgsql_mode = 'append'`. 


```sql
SELECT osm_date, region, srid,
        pgosm_flex_version, osm2pgsql_version, osm2pgsql_mode
    FROM osm.pgosm_flex
;
```

```bash
┌────────────┬───────────────────────────┬──────┬────────────────────┬───────────────────┬────────────────┐
│  osm_date  │          region           │ srid │ pgosm_flex_version │ osm2pgsql_version │ osm2pgsql_mode │
╞════════════╪═══════════════════════════╪══════╪════════════════════╪═══════════════════╪════════════════╡
│ 2022-11-04 │ north-america/us-colorado │ 3857 │ 0.6.2-e1f140f      │ 1.7.2             │ create         │
│ 2022-11-25 │ north-america/us-colorado │ 3857 │ 0.6.2-e1f140f      │ 1.7.2             │ append         │
└────────────┴───────────────────────────┴──────┴────────────────────┴───────────────────┴────────────────┘
```



## Explore data loaded

A peek at some of the tables loaded.
This query requires the
[PostgreSQL Data Dictionary (PgDD) extension](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgdd),
use `\dt+ osm.*` in `psql` for similar details.


```sql
SELECT s_name, t_name, rows, size_plus_indexes 
    FROM dd.tables 
    WHERE s_name = 'osm' 
    ORDER BY t_name LIMIT 10;
```

```bash
    ┌────────┬──────────────────────┬────────┬───────────────────┐
    │ s_name │        t_name        │  rows  │ size_plus_indexes │
    ╞════════╪══════════════════════╪════════╪═══════════════════╡
    │ osm    │ amenity_line         │      7 │ 56 kB             │
    │ osm    │ amenity_point        │   5796 │ 1136 kB           │
    │ osm    │ amenity_polygon      │   7593 │ 3704 kB           │
    │ osm    │ building_point       │    525 │ 128 kB            │
    │ osm    │ building_polygon     │ 161256 │ 55 MB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_line          │      1 │ 40 kB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_point         │      5 │ 40 kB             │
    │ osm    │ indoor_polygon       │    288 │ 136 kB            │
    │ osm    │ infrastructure_point │    884 │ 216 kB            │
    │ osm    │ landuse_point        │     18 │ 56 kB             │
    └────────┴──────────────────────┴────────┴───────────────────┘
```






## One table to rule them all

From the perspective of database design, the `osm.unitable` option is the **worst**!
This table violates all sorts of best practices established in this project
by shoving all features into a single unstructured table.

> This style included in PgOSM Flex is intended to be used for troubleshooting and quality control.  It is not intended to be used for real production workloads! This table is helpful for exploring the full data set when you don't really know what you are looking for, but you know **where** you are looking.

Unitable is loaded with the `everything` layerset.  Feel free to create your own
customized layerset if needed.



```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia \
    --layerset=everything
```


> The `unitable.lua` script included in this project was [adapted from the unitable example from osm2pgsql](https://github.com/openstreetmap/osm2pgsql/blob/master/flex-config/unitable.lua). This version uses `JSONB` instead of `HSTORE`, and takes advantage of `helpers.lua` to easily customize SRID.


## JSONB support

PgOSM-Flex uses `JSONB` in Postgres to store the raw OpenStreetMap
key/value data (`tags` column) and relation members (`member_ids`).
The `tags` column only exists in the `osm.tags` and `osm.unitable` tables.
The `member_ids` column is included in:

* `osm.place_polygon`
* `osm.poi_polygon`
* `osm.public_transport_line`
* `osm.public_transport_polygon`
* `osm.road_line`
* `osm.road_major`
* `osm.road_polygon`



## Additional resources


Blog posts covering various details and background information.

* [Book Release! Mastering PostGIS and OpenStreetMap](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2022/10/announce-mastering-postgis-openstreemap)
* [Better OpenStreetMap places in PostGIS](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/01/pgosm-flex-improved-openstreetmap-places-postgis)
* [Improved OpenStreetMap data structure in PostGIS](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2021/01/postgis-openstreetmap-flex-structure) 
* [Hands on with osm2pgsql's new Flex output](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2020/12/osm2gpsql-flex-output-to-postgis).
