docs/src/routing-3.md, before:

# Routing Roads: Legacy (pgRouting 3)

If you are using a pgRouting 4.0 or later see [Routing with pgRouting 4](./routing-4.md).

New development in PgOSM Flex will focus support on pgRouting 4.0 support
per the Versions Supported section  [in the About page](./readme.md).
[PgOSM Flex 1.1.2](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex/releases/tag/1.1.2)
simplified and improved performance in the routing data preparation.


> ⚠️ This page will remain in the PgOSM documentation through at least 2026 to ensure
> continuity for a transition to pgRouting 4.0.
> There will not be improvements made to these legacy instructions.

Create the `pgRouting` extension.

```sql
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pgrouting;
```


## Clean the data

The following query does the initial cleanup for preparing OpenStreetMap roads
for routing. The following code is converting multi-linestrings to standard
linestrings for subsequent processing steps.

```sql
CREATE TABLE routing.road_line AS
WITH a AS (
-- Remove as many multi-linestrings as possible with ST_LineMerge() 
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        ST_LineMerge(geom) AS geom
    FROM osm.road_line
), extra_cleanup AS (
-- Pull out those that are still multi, use ST_Dump() to pull out parts
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        (ST_Dump(geom)).geom AS geom
    FROM a 
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) = 'ST_MultiLineString'
), combined AS (
-- Combine two sources
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        geom
    FROM a
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) != 'ST_MultiLineString'
UNION
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        geom
    FROM extra_cleanup
    -- Some data may be lost here if multi-linestring somehow
    -- persists through the extra_cleanup query
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) != 'ST_MultiLineString'
)
-- Calculate a new surrogate ID for key
SELECT ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY geom) AS id, *
    FROM combined
    ORDER BY geom
;
```

The above query creates the `routing.road_line` table.  The next step
adds some database best practices to the table:

* Explain why a surrogate ID was added
* Primary key on the `id` column
* Index on `osm_id`


```sql
COMMENT ON COLUMN routing.road_line.id IS 'Surrogate ID, cannot rely on osm_id being unique after converting multi-linestrings to linestrings.';
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line
    ADD CONSTRAINT pk_routing_road_line PRIMARY KEY (id)
;
CREATE INDEX ix_routing_road_line_osm_id
    ON routing.road_line (osm_id)
;
```

To prepare the OpenStreetMap roads data for routing with the older pgRouting
installation, run the
pgRouting functions `pgr_nodeNetwork()`, `pgr_createTopology()`,
and `pgr_analyzeGraph()`.


```sql
SELECT pgr_nodeNetwork('routing.road_line', 0.1, 'id', 'geom');
SELECT pgr_createTopology('routing.road_line_noded', 0.1, 'geom');
SELECT pgr_analyzeGraph('routing.road_line_noded', 0.1, 'geom');
```

> Note: These functions were all removed in pgRouting 4.0.

Running the functions shown above will create two (2) new tables
usable for routing.

* `routing.road_line_noded`
* `routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr`


## Timing note

The pgRouting functions shown in the preceding section can take a
long time to complete on larger regions.
It is often a good idea to run these from `psql` within a screen
emulator, such as `screen` or `tmux` that allow you to disconnect
from the long-running command without cancelling the query.


## Determine Costs

Routing requires a cost in order to determine the best route to
take.
The following query creates a simple `cost_length` column to
the `routing.road_line_noded` table as a generated column.
This is a simple way to get started with costs for routing.

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (ST_Length(geom))
    STORED; 
```

> Note: This is for non-directional routing.  See the *Routing `oneway`* section below for more on directional routing.


# Determine route start and end

The following query identifies the vertex IDs for a start and end point 
to use for later queries. The query uses an input set of points
created from specific longitude/latitude values.
Use the `start_id` and `end_id` values from this query
in subsequent queries through the `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables
via DBeaver.


```sql
WITH s_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS start_id
    FROM routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0211, 38.92255), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.the_geom <-> geom < 10
    ORDER BY v.the_geom <-> geom
    LIMIT 1
), e_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS end_id
    FROM routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0183, 38.9227), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.the_geom <-> geom < 10
    ORDER BY v.the_geom <-> geom
    LIMIT 1
)
SELECT s_point.start_id, e_point.end_id
    FROM s_point, e_point
;
```

```bash
┌──────────┬────────┐
│ start_id │ end_id │
╞══════════╪════════╡
│    14630 │  14686 │
└──────────┴────────┘
```


> Warning: The vertex IDs returned by the above query will vary. The pgRouting functions that generate this data do not guarantee data will always be generated in precisely the same order, causing these IDs to be different.


The vertex IDs returned were `14630` and `14686`.  These points
span a particular segment of road (`osm_id = 6062791`) that is tagged
as `highway=residential` and `access=private`.
This segment is used to illustrate how the calculated access
control columns, `route_motor`, `route_cycle` and `route_foot`,
can influence route selection.



```sql
SELECT *
    FROM routing.road_line
    WHERE osm_id = 6062791
;
```

![Screenshot from QGIS showing two labeled points, 14630 and 14686. The road between the two points is shown with a light gray dash indicating the access tag indicates non-public travel.](dc-example-route-start-end-vertices.png)

> See `flex-config/helpers.lua` functions (e.g. `routable_motor()`) for logic behind access control columns.


# Simple route

Using `pgr_dijkstra()` and no additional filters will
use all roads from OpenStreetMap without regard to mode of travel
or access rules.
This query picks a route that traverses sidewalks and
a section of road with the
[`access=private` tag from OpenStreetMap](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:access%3Dprivate).
The key details to focus on in the following queries
is the string containing a SQL query passed into the `pgr_dijkstra()`
function.  This first example is a simple query from the
`routing.road_line_noded` table.

> Note:  These queries are intended to be ran using DBeaver.  The `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables work within DBeaver, but not via `psql` or QGIS.  Support in other GUIs is unknown at this time (PRs welcome!).


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT id, source, target, cost_length AS cost,
                geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and no access control. The route is direct, traversing the road marked access=private.](dc-example-route-start-no-access-control.png)


# Route motorized

The following query modifies the query passed in to `pgr_dijkstra()`
to join the `routing.road_line_noded` table to the
`routing.road_line` table.  This allows using attributes available
in the upstream table for additional routing logic.
The join clause includes a filter on the `route_motor` column.

From the comment on the `osm.road_line.route_motor` column:

> "Best guess if the segment is route-able for motorized traffic. If access is no or private, set to false. WARNING: This does not indicate that this method of travel is safe OR allowed!"

Based on this comment, we can expect that adding `AND r.route_motor`
into the filter will ensure the road type is suitable for motorized
traffic, and it excludes routes marked private. 


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT n.id, n.source, n.target, n.cost_length AS cost,
                n.geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded n
            INNER JOIN routing.road_line r ON n.old_id = r.id
                    AND r.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control.png)



# Route `oneway`


The route shown in the previous example now respects the
access control and limits to routes suitable for motorized traffic.
It, however, **did not** respect the one-way access control.
The very first segment (top-left corner of screenshot) went
the wrong way on a one-way street.
This behavior is a result of the simple length-based cost model.


The `oneway` column in the road tables uses
[osm2pgsql's `direction` data type](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#type-conversions) which resolves to `int2` in Postgres.
Valid values are:

* `0`: Not one way
* `1`: One way, forward travel allowed
* `-1`: One way, reverse travel allowed
* `NULL`: It's complicated. See #172.


Assuming a noded roads table routing table, bring over the `oneway` detail

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD oneway INT2 NULL
;

UPDATE routing.road_line_noded rn
    SET oneway = r.oneway
    FROM routing.road_line r
    WHERE rn.old_id = r.id AND rn.oneway IS NULL
;
```

## Forward and reverse costs

Calculate forward cost.

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    DROP COLUMN IF EXISTS cost_length
;

-- Cost with oneway considerations
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, 1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = -1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```

Reverse cost.

```sql
-- Reverse cost with oneway considerations
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length_reverse NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, -1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = 1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```


This query uses the new reverse cost column, and changes
`directed` from `False` to `True`.


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT n.id, n.source, n.target, n.cost_length AS cost,
                n.cost_length_reverse AS reverse_cost,
                n.geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded n
            INNER JOIN routing.road_line r ON n.old_id = r.id
                    AND r.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := True
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor and using the improved cost model including forward and reverse costs. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private, as well as respects the one-way access controls.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control-oneway.png)

Commit message:

More docs cleanup in routing sections

docs/src/routing-3.md, after:

# Routing Roads: Legacy (pgRouting 3)

## Plan your Upgrade!

This page is a legacy documentation page for versions of pgRouting
older than 4.0. This process requires more manual effort to setup and
results in lower-quality routing networks compared to the
[latest procedures](./routing-road.md).

It is recommended to use pgRouting 4.0 or later, see [the latest Routing Roads](./routing-road.md)
documentation.

> ⚠️ This page is no longer maintained.
>
> This page will remain in the PgOSM documentation for the foreseeable future to ensure
> continuity for a transition to pgRouting 4.0.


## Getting Started

Create the `pgRouting` extension.

```sql
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pgrouting;
```


## Clean the data

The following query does the initial cleanup for preparing OpenStreetMap roads
for routing. The following code is converting multi-linestrings to standard
linestrings for subsequent processing steps.

```sql
CREATE TABLE routing.road_line AS
WITH a AS (
-- Remove as many multi-linestrings as possible with ST_LineMerge() 
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        ST_LineMerge(geom) AS geom
    FROM osm.road_line
), extra_cleanup AS (
-- Pull out those that are still multi, use ST_Dump() to pull out parts
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        (ST_Dump(geom)).geom AS geom
    FROM a 
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) = 'ST_MultiLineString'
), combined AS (
-- Combine two sources
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        geom
    FROM a
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) != 'ST_MultiLineString'
UNION
SELECT osm_id, osm_type, maxspeed, oneway, layer,
        route_foot, route_cycle, route_motor, access,
        geom
    FROM extra_cleanup
    -- Some data may be lost here if multi-linestring somehow
    -- persists through the extra_cleanup query
    WHERE ST_GeometryType(geom) != 'ST_MultiLineString'
)
-- Calculate a new surrogate ID for key
SELECT ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY geom) AS id, *
    FROM combined
    ORDER BY geom
;
```

The above query creates the `routing.road_line` table.  The next step
adds some database best practices to the table:

* Explain why a surrogate ID was added
* Primary key on the `id` column
* Index on `osm_id`


```sql
COMMENT ON COLUMN routing.road_line.id IS 'Surrogate ID, cannot rely on osm_id being unique after converting multi-linestrings to linestrings.';
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line
    ADD CONSTRAINT pk_routing_road_line PRIMARY KEY (id)
;
CREATE INDEX ix_routing_road_line_osm_id
    ON routing.road_line (osm_id)
;
```

To prepare the OpenStreetMap roads data for routing with the older pgRouting
installation, run the
pgRouting functions `pgr_nodeNetwork()`, `pgr_createTopology()`,
and `pgr_analyzeGraph()`.


```sql
SELECT pgr_nodeNetwork('routing.road_line', 0.1, 'id', 'geom');
SELECT pgr_createTopology('routing.road_line_noded', 0.1, 'geom');
SELECT pgr_analyzeGraph('routing.road_line_noded', 0.1, 'geom');
```

> Note: These functions were all removed in pgRouting 4.0.

Running the functions shown above will create two (2) new tables
usable for routing.

* `routing.road_line_noded`
* `routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr`


## Timing note

The pgRouting functions shown in the preceding section can take a
long time to complete on larger regions.
It is often a good idea to run these from `psql` within a screen
emulator, such as `screen` or `tmux` that allow you to disconnect
from the long-running command without cancelling the query.


## Determine Costs

Routing requires a cost in order to determine the best route to
take.
The following query creates a simple `cost_length` column to
the `routing.road_line_noded` table as a generated column.
This is a simple way to get started with costs for routing.

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (ST_Length(geom))
    STORED; 
```

> Note: This is for non-directional routing.  See the *Routing `oneway`* section below for more on directional routing.


# Determine route start and end

The following query identifies the vertex IDs for a start and end point 
to use for later queries. The query uses an input set of points
created from specific longitude/latitude values.
Use the `start_id` and `end_id` values from this query
in subsequent queries through the `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables
via DBeaver.


```sql
WITH s_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS start_id
    FROM routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0211, 38.92255), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.the_geom <-> geom < 10
    ORDER BY v.the_geom <-> geom
    LIMIT 1
), e_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS end_id
    FROM routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0183, 38.9227), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.the_geom <-> geom < 10
    ORDER BY v.the_geom <-> geom
    LIMIT 1
)
SELECT s_point.start_id, e_point.end_id
    FROM s_point, e_point
;
```

```bash
┌──────────┬────────┐
│ start_id │ end_id │
╞══════════╪════════╡
│    14630 │  14686 │
└──────────┴────────┘
```


> Warning: The vertex IDs returned by the above query will vary. The pgRouting functions that generate this data do not guarantee data will always be generated in precisely the same order, causing these IDs to be different.


The vertex IDs returned were `14630` and `14686`.  These points
span a particular segment of road (`osm_id = 6062791`) that is tagged
as `highway=residential` and `access=private`.
This segment is used to illustrate how the calculated access
control columns, `route_motor`, `route_cycle` and `route_foot`,
can influence route selection.



```sql
SELECT *
    FROM routing.road_line
    WHERE osm_id = 6062791
;
```

![Screenshot from QGIS showing two labeled points, 14630 and 14686. The road between the two points is shown with a light gray dash indicating the access tag indicates non-public travel.](dc-example-route-start-end-vertices.png)

> See `flex-config/helpers.lua` functions (e.g. `routable_motor()`) for logic behind access control columns.


# Simple route

Using `pgr_dijkstra()` and no additional filters will
use all roads from OpenStreetMap without regard to mode of travel
or access rules.
This query picks a route that traverses sidewalks and
a section of road with the
[`access=private` tag from OpenStreetMap](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:access%3Dprivate).
The key details to focus on in the following queries
is the string containing a SQL query passed into the `pgr_dijkstra()`
function.  This first example is a simple query from the
`routing.road_line_noded` table.

> Note:  These queries are intended to be ran using DBeaver.  The `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables work within DBeaver, but not via `psql` or QGIS.  Support in other GUIs is unknown at this time (PRs welcome!).


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT id, source, target, cost_length AS cost,
                geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and no access control. The route is direct, traversing the road marked access=private.](dc-example-route-start-no-access-control.png)


# Route motorized

The following query modifies the query passed in to `pgr_dijkstra()`
to join the `routing.road_line_noded` table to the
`routing.road_line` table.  This allows using attributes available
in the upstream table for additional routing logic.
The join clause includes a filter on the `route_motor` column.

From the comment on the `osm.road_line.route_motor` column:

> "Best guess if the segment is route-able for motorized traffic. If access is no or private, set to false. WARNING: This does not indicate that this method of travel is safe OR allowed!"

Based on this comment, we can expect that adding `AND r.route_motor`
into the filter will ensure the road type is suitable for motorized
traffic, and it excludes routes marked private. 


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT n.id, n.source, n.target, n.cost_length AS cost,
                n.geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded n
            INNER JOIN routing.road_line r ON n.old_id = r.id
                    AND r.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control.png)



# Route `oneway`


The route shown in the previous example now respects the
access control and limits to routes suitable for motorized traffic.
It, however, **did not** respect the one-way access control.
The very first segment (top-left corner of screenshot) went
the wrong way on a one-way street.
This behavior is a result of the simple length-based cost model.


The `oneway` column in the road tables uses
[osm2pgsql's `direction` data type](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#type-conversions) which resolves to `int2` in Postgres.
Valid values are:

* `0`: Not one way
* `1`: One way, forward travel allowed
* `-1`: One way, reverse travel allowed
* `NULL`: It's complicated. See #172.


Assuming a noded roads table routing table, bring over the `oneway` detail

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD oneway INT2 NULL
;

UPDATE routing.road_line_noded rn
    SET oneway = r.oneway
    FROM routing.road_line r
    WHERE rn.old_id = r.id AND rn.oneway IS NULL
;
```

## Forward and reverse costs

Calculate forward cost.

```sql
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    DROP COLUMN IF EXISTS cost_length
;

-- Cost with oneway considerations
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, 1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = -1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```

Reverse cost.

```sql
-- Reverse cost with oneway considerations
ALTER TABLE routing.road_line_noded
    ADD cost_length_reverse NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, -1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = 1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```


This query uses the new reverse cost column, and changes
`directed` from `False` to `True`.


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.the_geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT n.id, n.source, n.target, n.cost_length AS cost,
                n.cost_length_reverse AS reverse_cost,
                n.geom
            FROM routing.road_line_noded n
            INNER JOIN routing.road_line r ON n.old_id = r.id
                    AND r.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := True
        ) d
    INNER JOIN routing.road_line_noded_vertices_pgr n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN routing.road_line_noded e ON d.edge = e.id
;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor and using the improved cost model including forward and reverse costs. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private, as well as respects the one-way access controls.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control-oneway.png)
