docs/src/routing-4.md, before:

# Routing with PgRouting 4

> If you are using a pgRouting prior to 4.0 see [Routing with pgRouting 3](./routing-3.md).

Create the `pgRouting` extension.

```sql
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pgrouting;
```


## Process the OpenStreetMap Roads

For routing on `osm.road_line` data use the `osm.routing_prepare_roads_for_routing`
procedure to prepare the edge and vertex data used for routing.

```sql
CALL osm.routing_prepare_roads_for_routing();
```

This procedure was created as part of the migration to pgRouting 4.0, see
[#408](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex/pull/408) for notes about
this.

The procedure focuses on the most common use cases of routing with the `osm.road_line`
layer.


### Timing for data preparation

* D.C.: 18 seconds
* Colorado: 11 minutes




## Costs

The following query establishes a simple length based cost. In the case of defaults
with PgOSM Flex, this results in costs in meters.

```sql
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (ST_Length(geom))
    STORED
;
COMMENT ON COLUMN osm.routing_road_edge.cost_length IS 'Length based cost. Units are determined by SRID of geom data.';
```


# Determine route start and end

The following query identifies the vertex IDs for a start and end point 
to use for later queries. The query uses an input set of points
created from specific longitude/latitude values.
Use the `start_id` and `end_id` values from this query
in subsequent queries through the `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables
via DBeaver.

> This query simulates a GUI allowing user to click on start/end points on a map,
> resulting in longitude and latitude values.


```sql
WITH s_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS start_id, v.geom
    FROM osm.routing_road_vertex v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0211, 38.92255), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.geom <-> p.geom < 20
    ORDER BY v.geom <-> p.geom
    LIMIT 1
), e_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS end_id, v.geom
    FROM osm.routing_road_vertex v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0183, 38.9227), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.geom <-> p.geom < 20
    ORDER BY v.geom <-> p.geom
    LIMIT 1
)
SELECT s_point.start_id, e_point.end_id
        , s_point.geom AS geom_start
        , e_point.geom AS geom_end
    FROM s_point, e_point
;
```

```bash
┌──────────┬────────┐
│ start_id │ end_id │
╞══════════╪════════╡
│    14630 │  14686 │
└──────────┴────────┘
```


> Warning: The vertex IDs returned by the above query will vary. The pgRouting functions that generate this data do not guarantee data will always be generated in precisely the same order, causing these IDs to be different.


The vertex IDs returned were `14630` and `14686`.  These points
span a particular segment of road (`osm_id = 6062791`) that is tagged
as `highway=residential` and `access=private`.
This segment is used to illustrate how the calculated access
control columns, `route_motor`, `route_cycle` and `route_foot`,
can influence route selection.



```sql
SELECT *
    FROM routing.road_line
    WHERE osm_id = 6062791
;
```

![Screenshot from QGIS showing two labeled points, 14630 and 14686. The road between the two points is shown with a light gray dash indicating the access tag indicates non-public travel.](dc-example-route-start-end-vertices.png)

> See `flex-config/helpers.lua` functions (e.g. `routable_motor()`) for logic behind access control columns.



# Route!


Using `pgr_dijkstra()` and no additional filters will
use all roads from OpenStreetMap without regard to mode of travel
or access rules.
This query picks a route that traverses sidewalks and
a section of road with the
[`access=private` tag from OpenStreetMap](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:access%3Dprivate).
The key details to focus on in the following queries
is the string containing a SQL query passed into the `pgr_dijkstra()`
function.  This first example is a simple query from the
`osm.routing_road_edge` table.

> Note:  These queries are intended to be ran using DBeaver.  The `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables work within DBeaver, but not via `psql` or QGIS.  Support in other GUIs is unknown at this time (PRs welcome!).


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT edge_id AS id, source, target, cost_length AS cost,
                geom
            FROM osm.routing_road_edge
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and no access control. The route is direct, traversing the road marked access=private.](dc-example-route-start-no-access-control.png)




# Route motorized

The following query modifies the query passed in to `pgr_dijkstra()`
to join the `osm.routing_road_edge` table to the
`routing.road_line` table.  This allows using attributes available
in the upstream table for additional routing logic.
The join clause includes a filter on the `route_motor` column.

From the comment on the `osm.road_line.route_motor` column:

> "Best guess if the segment is route-able for motorized traffic. If access is no or private, set to false. WARNING: This does not indicate that this method of travel is safe OR allowed!"

Based on this comment, we can expect that adding `AND route_motor`
into the filter will ensure the road type is suitable for motorized
traffic, and it excludes routes marked private. 


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT e.edge_id AS id, e.source, e.target, e.cost_length AS cost,
                e.geom
            FROM osm.routing_road_edge e
            WHERE e.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control.png)



# Route `oneway`


The route shown in the previous example now respects the
access control and limits to routes suitable for motorized traffic.
It, however, **did not** respect the one-way access control.
The very first segment (top-left corner of screenshot) went
the wrong way on a one-way street.
This behavior is a result of the simple length-based cost model.


The `oneway` column in the road tables uses
[osm2pgsql's `direction` data type](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#type-conversions) 
which resolves to `int2` in Postgres. Valid values are:

* `0`: Not one way
* `1`: One way, forward travel allowed
* `-1`: One way, reverse travel allowed
* `NULL`: It's complicated. See [#172](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex/issues/172).

The `osm.routing_road_edge` table already has the `oneway` column from the
`osm.road_line` table used as the source.


## Forward and reverse costs

Calculate forward and reverse costs using the `oneway` column. This still provides
a length-based cost. The change is to also enforce direction restrictions within
the cost model.

```sql
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length_forward NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, 1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = -1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```

Reverse cost.

```sql
-- Reverse cost with oneway considerations
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length_reverse NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, -1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = 1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;
```


This query uses the new reverse cost column, and changes
`directed` from `False` to `True`.
If you do not see the route shown in the screenshot below, try switching the
`:start_id` and `:end_id` values.


```sql
    SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
        FROM pgr_dijkstra(
            'SELECT e.edge_id AS id, e.source, e.target
                    , e.cost_length_forward AS cost
                    , e.cost_length_reverse AS reverse_cost
                    , e.geom
                FROM osm.routing_road_edge e
                WHERE e.route_motor
                ',
                :start_id, :end_id, directed := True
            ) d
        INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
        LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
    ;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor and using the improved cost model including forward and reverse costs. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private, as well as respects the one-way access controls.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control-oneway.png)

Commit message:

Stacking edges with blade before splitting.

docs/src/routing-4.md, after:

# Routing with PgRouting 4

> If you are using a pgRouting prior to 4.0 see [Routing with pgRouting 3](./routing-3.md).

Create the `pgRouting` extension.

```sql
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pgrouting;
```


## Process the OpenStreetMap Roads

For routing on `osm.road_line` data use the `osm.routing_prepare_roads_for_routing`
procedure to prepare the edge and vertex data used for routing.

```sql
CALL osm.routing_prepare_roads_for_routing();
```

This procedure was created as part of the migration to pgRouting 4.0, see
[#408](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex/pull/408) for notes about
this.

The procedure focuses on the most common use cases of routing with the `osm.road_line`
layer.


### Timing for data preparation

* D.C.: 18 seconds
* Colorado: 11 minutes




## Costs

The following query establishes a simple length based cost. In the case of defaults
with PgOSM Flex, this results in costs in meters.

> ⚠️ Warning: PgOSM Flex uses SRID 3857 by default. This generic projection is useful for
> global web mapping, however it does not provide accurate calculation for most Latitudes
> of the world. For accurate calculations, either run PgOSM Flex to load data
> in an accurate, local SRID, or use `ST_Transform(geom, your_srid)`.
> 
> See [Accuracy of Geometry data in PostGIS](https://blog.rustprooflabs.com/2023/04/postgis-geometry-accuracy) for more.


```sql
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (ST_Length(geom))
    STORED
;
COMMENT ON COLUMN osm.routing_road_edge.cost_length IS 'Length based cost. Units are determined by SRID of geom data.';
```


# Determine route start and end

The following query identifies the vertex IDs for a start and end point 
to use for later queries. The query uses an input set of points
created from specific longitude/latitude values.
Use the `start_id` and `end_id` values from this query
in subsequent queries through the `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables
via DBeaver.

> This query simulates a GUI allowing user to click on start/end points on a map,
> resulting in longitude and latitude values.


```sql
WITH s_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS start_id, v.geom
    FROM osm.routing_road_vertex v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0211, 38.92255), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.geom <-> p.geom < 20
    ORDER BY v.geom <-> p.geom
    LIMIT 1
), e_point AS (
SELECT v.id AS end_id, v.geom
    FROM osm.routing_road_vertex v
    INNER JOIN (SELECT
        ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(-77.0183, 38.9227), 4326), 3857)
            AS geom
        ) p ON v.geom <-> p.geom < 20
    ORDER BY v.geom <-> p.geom
    LIMIT 1
)
SELECT s_point.start_id, e_point.end_id
        , s_point.geom AS geom_start
        , e_point.geom AS geom_end
    FROM s_point, e_point
;
```

```bash
┌──────────┬────────┐
│ start_id │ end_id │
╞══════════╪════════╡
│    14630 │  14686 │
└──────────┴────────┘
```


> Warning: The vertex IDs returned by the above query will vary. The pgRouting functions that generate this data do not guarantee data will always be generated in precisely the same order, causing these IDs to be different.


The vertex IDs returned were `14630` and `14686`.  These points
span a particular segment of road (`osm_id = 6062791`) that is tagged
as `highway=residential` and `access=private`.
This segment is used to illustrate how the calculated access
control columns, `route_motor`, `route_cycle` and `route_foot`,
can influence route selection.



```sql
SELECT *
    FROM routing.road_line
    WHERE osm_id = 6062791
;
```

![Screenshot from QGIS showing two labeled points, 14630 and 14686. The road between the two points is shown with a light gray dash indicating the access tag indicates non-public travel.](dc-example-route-start-end-vertices.png)

> See `flex-config/helpers.lua` functions (e.g. `routable_motor()`) for logic behind access control columns.



# Route!


Using `pgr_dijkstra()` and no additional filters will
use all roads from OpenStreetMap without regard to mode of travel
or access rules.
This query picks a route that traverses sidewalks and
a section of road with the
[`access=private` tag from OpenStreetMap](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag:access%3Dprivate).
The key details to focus on in the following queries
is the string containing a SQL query passed into the `pgr_dijkstra()`
function.  This first example is a simple query from the
`osm.routing_road_edge` table.

> Note:  These queries are intended to be ran using DBeaver.  The `:start_id` and `:end_id` variables work within DBeaver, but not via `psql` or QGIS.  Support in other GUIs is unknown at this time (PRs welcome!).


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT edge_id AS id, source, target, cost_length AS cost,
                geom
            FROM osm.routing_road_edge
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and no access control. The route is direct, traversing the road marked access=private.](dc-example-route-start-no-access-control.png)




# Route motorized

The following query modifies the query passed in to `pgr_dijkstra()`
to join the `osm.routing_road_edge` table to the
`routing.road_line` table.  This allows using attributes available
in the upstream table for additional routing logic.
The join clause includes a filter on the `route_motor` column.

From the comment on the `osm.road_line.route_motor` column:

> "Best guess if the segment is route-able for motorized traffic. If access is no or private, set to false. WARNING: This does not indicate that this method of travel is safe OR allowed!"

Based on this comment, we can expect that adding `AND route_motor`
into the filter will ensure the road type is suitable for motorized
traffic, and it excludes routes marked private. 


```sql
SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
    FROM pgr_dijkstra(
        'SELECT e.edge_id AS id, e.source, e.target, e.cost_length AS cost,
                e.geom
            FROM osm.routing_road_edge e
            WHERE e.route_motor
            ',
            :start_id, :end_id, directed := False
        ) d
    INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
    LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
;
```


![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control.png)



# Route `oneway`


The route shown in the previous example now respects the
access control and limits to routes suitable for motorized traffic.
It, however, **did not** respect the one-way access control.
The very first segment (top-left corner of screenshot) went
the wrong way on a one-way street.
This behavior is a result of the simple length-based cost model.


The `oneway` column in the road tables uses
[osm2pgsql's `direction` data type](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#type-conversions) 
which resolves to `int2` in Postgres. Valid values are:

* `0`: Not one way
* `1`: One way, forward travel allowed
* `-1`: One way, reverse travel allowed
* `NULL`: It's complicated. See [#172](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex/issues/172).

The `osm.routing_road_edge` table already has the `oneway` column from the
`osm.road_line` table used as the source.


## Forward and reverse costs

Calculate forward and reverse costs using the `oneway` column. This still provides
a length-based cost. The change is to also enforce direction restrictions within
the cost model.



```sql
-- Add forward cost column, enforcing oneway restrictions
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length_forward NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, 1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = -1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;

-- Add reverse cost column, enforcing oneway restrictions
ALTER TABLE osm.routing_road_edge
    ADD cost_length_reverse NUMERIC
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (
        CASE WHEN oneway IN (0, -1) OR oneway IS NULL
                THEN ST_Length(geom)
            WHEN oneway = 1
                THEN -1 * ST_Length(geom)
            END
    )
    STORED
;

COMMENT ON COLUMN osm.routing_road_edge.cost_length_forward IS 'Length based cost for forward travel when using directed travel graphs.';
COMMENT ON COLUMN osm.routing_road_edge.cost_length_reverse IS 'Length based cost for reverse travel when using directed travel graphs.';
```


This query uses the new reverse cost column, and changes
`directed` from `False` to `True`.
If you do not see the route shown in the screenshot below, try switching the
`:start_id` and `:end_id` values.


```sql
    SELECT d.*, n.geom AS node_geom, e.geom AS edge_geom
        FROM pgr_dijkstra(
            'SELECT e.edge_id AS id, e.source, e.target
                    , e.cost_length_forward AS cost
                    , e.cost_length_reverse AS reverse_cost
                    , e.geom
                FROM osm.routing_road_edge e
                WHERE e.route_motor
                ',
                :start_id, :end_id, directed := True
            ) d
        INNER JOIN osm.routing_road_vertex n ON d.node = n.id
        LEFT JOIN osm.routing_road_edge e ON d.edge = e.edge_id
    ;
```

![Screenshot from DBeaver showing the route generated with all roads and limiting based on route_motor and using the improved cost model including forward and reverse costs. The route bypasses the road(s) marked access=no and access=private, as well as respects the one-way access controls.](dc-example-route-start-motor-access-control-oneway.png)
