docs/DOCKER-RUN-EXTERNAL-PG.md, before:

# Experimental: PgOSM Flex in Docker with External Postgres connection

----


WARNING: Using PgOSM Flex in this manner is experimental and results
may differ from expecations.

----


Optional, set Postgres host outside of Docker image.  Warning: experimental!

```bash
export POSTGRES_USER=postgres
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword
export POSTGRES_HOST=your-host-or-ip
export POSTGRES_DB=your_db_name
export POSTGRES_PORT=5432
```

Create the database.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE your_db_name;
```

The target database needs the `postgis` extension and the `osm` schema created.


```sql
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;
CREATE SCHEMA osm;
```


WARNING:  DB Port is currently hard coded to `5432`.
The above setting is for planned, not yet implemented, behavior.


```bash
docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_USER=$POSTGRES_USER \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -e POSTGRES_HOST=$POSTGRES_HOST \
    -e POSTGRES_DB=$POSTGRES_DB \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex
```

Run normally.  Setting `POSTGRES_HOST` to anything but `localhost`
disables the drop/create database step.


```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia
```

Commit message:

Add permissions example to docs. Fix db name handling. Fix unit tests for recent changes.

docs/DOCKER-RUN-EXTERNAL-PG.md, after:

# Experimental: PgOSM Flex in Docker with External Postgres connection

----


WARNING: Using PgOSM Flex in this manner is experimental and results
may differ from expecations.

----


These prodecures outline how to use PgOSM Flex's Docker image
with a Postgres host outside of Docker image.

> Warning: experimental!


```bash
export POSTGRES_USER=your_postgres_role
export POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mysecretpassword
export POSTGRES_HOST=your-host-or-ip
export POSTGRES_DB=your_db_name
export POSTGRES_PORT=5432
```

Create the database.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE your_db_name;
```

The target database needs the `postgis` extension.

```sql
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;
```

PgOSM Flex uses the `osm` schema, the easiest way to enable permissions
to run is to create a dedicated `pgosm_flex` role that owns the `osm`
schema, and grant that role to your login user role.



```sql
CREATE ROLE pgosm_flex;
GRANT pgosm_flex TO your_login_role;
CREATE SCHEMA osm AUTHORIZATION pgosm_flex;
```




WARNING:  DB Port is currently hard coded to `5432`.
The above setting is for planned, not yet implemented, behavior.


```bash
docker run --name pgosm -d --rm \
    -v ~/pgosm-data:/app/output \
    -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro \
    -e POSTGRES_USER=$POSTGRES_USER \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=$POSTGRES_PASSWORD \
    -e POSTGRES_HOST=$POSTGRES_HOST \
    -e POSTGRES_DB=$POSTGRES_DB \
    -p 5433:5432 -d rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex
```

Run normally.  Setting `POSTGRES_HOST` to anything but `localhost`
disables the drop/create database step.


```bash
docker exec -it \
    pgosm python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py \
    --ram=8 \
    --region=north-america/us \
    --subregion=district-of-columbia \
    --skip-dump --data-only
```
