docs/MANUAL-STEPS-RUN.md, before:

# PgOSM Flex Standard Import

These instructions show how to manually run the PgOSM-Flex process.
This is the best option for scaling to larger regions (North America, Europe, etc.)
due to the need to customize a number of configurations.  Review the
`python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py` for a starting point to automating the process.

This basic working example uses Washington D.C. for a small, fast test of the
process.


## Ubuntu Pre-reqs

This section covers installation of prerequisites required to install Postgres,
osm2pgsql, and PgOSM-Flex on Ubuntu 20.04.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y \
        sqitch wget curl ca-certificates \
        git make cmake g++ \
        libboost-dev libboost-system-dev \
        libboost-filesystem-dev libexpat1-dev zlib1g-dev \
        libbz2-dev libpq-dev libproj-dev lua5.2 liblua5.2-dev \
        unzip
```

LuaRocks is installed from source to ensure the latest version is available. Instructions
[from luarocks.org](https://luarocks.org/).


```bash
wget https://luarocks.org/releases/luarocks-3.8.0.tar.gz
tar zxpf luarocks-3.8.0.tar.gz
cd luarocks-3.8.0
./configure && make && sudo make install
```

Use `luarocks` to install `inifile` and `luasql-postgres`.


```bash
sudo luarocks install inifile
sudo luarocks install luasql-postgres PGSQL_INCDIR=/usr/include/postgresql/
```

Install osm2pgsql from source.  The version from `apt install` is unlikely to be new enough
for use with this project.


```bash
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/openstreetmap/osm2pgsql.git
mkdir osm2pgsql/build
cd osm2pgsql/build
cmake ..
make
sudo make install
```

Add PGDG repo and install Postgres.  More [on Postgres Wiki](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Apt).

```bash
curl https://www.postgresql.org/media/keys/ACCC4CF8.asc | sudo apt-key add - 
sudo sh -c 'echo "deb http://apt.postgresql.org/pub/repos/apt $(lsb_release -cs)-pgdg main" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pgdg.list'
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install postgresql-13 \
    postgresql-13-postgis-3 \
    postgresql-13-postgis-3-scripts
```

See the [osm2pgsql documentation](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#preparing-the-database) for advice on tuning Postgres configuration
for running osm2pgsql and Postgres on the same host.


## Download data

Download the PBF file and MD5 from Geofabrik.

```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
cd ~/pgosm-data
wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf
wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf.md5
```

Verify integrity of the downloaded PBF file using `md5sum -c`.

```bash
md5sum -c district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf.md5
district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf: OK
```

## Prepare database

The typical use case is to run osm2pgsql and Postgres/PostGIS on the same node.
When using Postgres locally, only add the database name to the connection strings.


```bash
export PGOSM_CONN_PG="postgres"
export PGOSM_CONN="pgosm"
```

To run with a non-local Postgres connection, use a connection string such as:

```bash
export PGOSM_CONN_PG="postgresql://your_user:password@your_postgres_host/postgres"
export PGOSM_CONN="postgresql://your_user:password@your_postgres_host/pgosm"
```

Create the `pgosm` database.

```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN_PG -c "CREATE DATABASE pgosm;"
```

Create the `postgis` extension and the `osm` schema.

```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CREATE EXTENSION postgis; CREATE SCHEMA osm;"
```

See [POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md](POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md) for more about
permissions required by PgOSM Flex to run.


## Prepare PgOSM-Flex

The PgOSM-Flex styles from this project are required to run the following.
Clone the repo and change into the directory containing
the `.lua` and `.sql` scripts.


```bash
mkdir ~/git
cd ~/git
git clone https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex.git
cd pgosm-flex/flex-config
```


## Set PgOSM variables

*(Recommended)* 

Set the `PGOSM_DATE` and `PGOSM_REGION` env vars to indicate the
date and region of the downloaded OpenStreetMap data.
This data is saved in the `osm.pgosm_flex` table to allow end users in the resulting
data to know what each dataset should contain.


```bash
export PGOSM_DATE='2021-03-14'
export PGOSM_REGION='north-america/us--district-of-columbia'
```

These values show up in the `osm.pgosm_flex` table.

```sql
SELECT osm_date, region FROM osm.pgosm_flex;
```

```bash
┌────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  osm_date  │                 region                 │
╞════════════╪════════════════════════════════════════╡
│ 2021-03-14 │ north-america/us--district-of-columbia │
└────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

> Note:  See the [Customize PgOSM on the main README.md](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex#customize-pgosm) for all runtime customization options.


## Run osm2pgsql w/ PgOSM-Flex

The `run-all.lua` script provides the most complete set of OpenStreetMap
data.  The list of main tables in PgOSM-Flex will continue to grow and evolve.



```bash
cd pgosm-flex/flex-config

osm2pgsql --output=flex --style=./run.lua \
    -d $PGOSM_CONN \
    ~/pgosm-data/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf
```

## Run post-processing SQL

Each `.lua` script as an associated `.sql` script to create 
primary keys, indexes, comments, views and more.


```bash
lua ./run-sql.lua
```

> Note: The `run-all` scripts exclude `unitable` and `road_major`.

## Config Layerset

Define `PGOSM_LAYERSET` to override the use of `layerset/default.ini`.

```bash
export PGOSM_LAYERSET=everything
```

To define a path to custom layersets outside the standard path
set the `PGOSM_LAYERSET_PATH` env var.

NOTE: Include the trailing slash!

```bash
export PGOSM_LAYERSET_PATH=/custom-layerset/
```

Read more about layersets in [LAYERSETS.md](LAYERSETS.md).



## Generated nested place polygons

*(Recommended)*

The post-processing SQL scripts create a procedure to calculate the nested place polygon data.  It does not run by default in the previous step because it can be expensive (slow) on large regions.


```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CALL osm.populate_place_polygon_nested();"
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CALL osm.build_nested_admin_polygons();"
```


# More options




## Additional structure and helper data

**Optional**

Deploying the additional table structure is done via [sqitch](https://sqitch.org/).

Assumes this repo is cloned under `~/git/pgosm-flex/` and a local Postgres
DB named `pgosm` has been created with the `postgis` extension installed.

```bash
cd ~/git/pgosm-flex/db
sqitch deploy db:pg:pgosm
```

With the structures created, load helper road data.

```bash
cd ~/git/pgosm-flex/db
psql -d pgosm -f data/roads-us.sql
```


Currently only U.S. region drafted, more regions with local `maxspeed` are welcome via PR!


## Customize PgOSM Flex

Track additional details in the `osm.pgosm_meta` table (see more below)
and customize behavior with the use of environment variables.

* `OSM_DATE`
* `PGOSM_SRID`
* `PGOSM_REGION`
* `PGOSM_LANGUAGE`


### Custom SRID

To use `SRID 4326` instead of the default `SRID 3857`, set the `PGOSM_SRID`
environment variable before running osm2pgsql.

```bash
export PGOSM_SRID=4326
```

Changes to the SRID are reflected in output printed.

```bash
2021-01-08 15:01:15  osm2pgsql version 1.4.0 (1.4.0-72-gc3eb0fb6)
2021-01-08 15:01:15  Database version: 13.1 (Ubuntu 13.1-1.pgdg20.10+1)
2021-01-08 15:01:15  Node-cache: cache=800MB, maxblocks=12800*65536, allocation method=11
Custom SRID: 4326
...
```

### Preferred Language

The `name` column throughout PgOSM-Flex defaults to using the highest priority
name tag according to the [OSM Wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Names). Setting `PGOSM_LANGUAGE` allows giving preference to name tags with the
given language.
The value of `PGOSM_LANGUAGE` should match the codes used by OSM:

> where code is a lowercase language's ISO 639-1 alpha2 code, or a lowercase ISO 639-2 code if an ISO 639-1 code doesn't exist." -- [Multilingual names on OSM Wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Multilingual_names)


```bash
export PGOSM_LANGUAGE=kn
```


## Troubleshooting

There are a lot of moving parts in this process.
This section is a collection of troubleshooting notes related to running PgOSM Flex
and osm2pgsql manually.


### Error in osm2pgsql processing

A variety of issues can create problems in the osm2pgsql processing step.
The following is a generic list of things to check for the most common issues.
Please check the [documentation on osm2pgsql.org](https://osm2pgsql.org/) for
the latest documented functionality.

* Check `osm2pgsql --version`, typically the latest version is assumed
* Does your `.osm.pbf` file exist in the correct location?
* Does the database user have proper [permissisions in Postgres](POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md)?



### Too many Postgres connections

Using osm2pgsql opens a number of connections to the Postgres database. The
number of connections opened depends on two factors:  # of tables, and create/update mode.
You know you have encountered this problem if you get an error message such as
`ERROR: Connecting to database failed: connection to server at "localhost" (127.0.0.1), port 5432 failed: FATAL:  sorry, too many clients already`.


The osm2pgsql docs [document the number of connections](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#number-of-connections).  PgOSM Flex's default layerset creates 41
tables.  This means running in create mode (fresh import) will require at least
44 connections to Postgres.  Update mode (via `osm2pgsql-replication`) creates
a minimum of 208 connections to Postgres.


Using [pgBouncer](https://www.pgbouncer.org/) or another connection pool
in front of Postgres is recommended.

Commit message:

Bump osm2pgsql-tuner requirement. Adding notes to unmaintained documentation pages, moving original manual append notes to new, more properly named file.

docs/MANUAL-STEPS-RUN.md, after:

# PgOSM Flex Manual Import

> These manual procedures (outside of Docker) are not regularly tested or reviewed. The recommended way to use PgOSM Flex is through the Docker image.  The Docker image is capable of adjusting for regions of any size so this manual process no longer serves a necessary purpose.

----

These instructions show how to manually run the PgOSM-Flex process.
This is the best option for scaling to larger regions (North America, Europe, etc.)
due to the need to customize a number of configurations.  Review the
`python3 docker/pgosm_flex.py` for a starting point to automating the process.

This basic working example uses Washington D.C. for a small, fast test of the
process.


## Ubuntu Pre-reqs

This section covers installation of prerequisites required to install Postgres,
osm2pgsql, and PgOSM-Flex on Ubuntu 20.04.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y \
        sqitch wget curl ca-certificates \
        git make cmake g++ \
        libboost-dev libboost-system-dev \
        libboost-filesystem-dev libexpat1-dev zlib1g-dev \
        libbz2-dev libpq-dev libproj-dev lua5.2 liblua5.2-dev \
        unzip
```

LuaRocks is installed from source to ensure the latest version is available. Instructions
[from luarocks.org](https://luarocks.org/).


```bash
wget https://luarocks.org/releases/luarocks-3.8.0.tar.gz
tar zxpf luarocks-3.8.0.tar.gz
cd luarocks-3.8.0
./configure && make && sudo make install
```

Use `luarocks` to install `inifile` and `luasql-postgres`.


```bash
sudo luarocks install inifile
sudo luarocks install luasql-postgres PGSQL_INCDIR=/usr/include/postgresql/
```

Install osm2pgsql from source.  The version from `apt install` is unlikely to be new enough
for use with this project.


```bash
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/openstreetmap/osm2pgsql.git
mkdir osm2pgsql/build
cd osm2pgsql/build
cmake ..
make
sudo make install
```

Add PGDG repo and install Postgres.  More [on Postgres Wiki](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Apt).

```bash
curl https://www.postgresql.org/media/keys/ACCC4CF8.asc | sudo apt-key add - 
sudo sh -c 'echo "deb http://apt.postgresql.org/pub/repos/apt $(lsb_release -cs)-pgdg main" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pgdg.list'
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install postgresql-13 \
    postgresql-13-postgis-3 \
    postgresql-13-postgis-3-scripts
```

See the [osm2pgsql documentation](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#preparing-the-database) for advice on tuning Postgres configuration
for running osm2pgsql and Postgres on the same host.


## Download data

Download the PBF file and MD5 from Geofabrik.

```bash
mkdir ~/pgosm-data
cd ~/pgosm-data
wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf
wget https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/us/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf.md5
```

Verify integrity of the downloaded PBF file using `md5sum -c`.

```bash
md5sum -c district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf.md5
district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf: OK
```

## Prepare database

The typical use case is to run osm2pgsql and Postgres/PostGIS on the same node.
When using Postgres locally, only add the database name to the connection strings.


```bash
export PGOSM_CONN_PG="postgres"
export PGOSM_CONN="pgosm"
```

To run with a non-local Postgres connection, use a connection string such as:

```bash
export PGOSM_CONN_PG="postgresql://your_user:password@your_postgres_host/postgres"
export PGOSM_CONN="postgresql://your_user:password@your_postgres_host/pgosm"
```

Create the `pgosm` database.

```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN_PG -c "CREATE DATABASE pgosm;"
```

Create the `postgis` extension and the `osm` schema.

```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CREATE EXTENSION postgis; CREATE SCHEMA osm;"
```

See [POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md](POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md) for more about
permissions required by PgOSM Flex to run.


## Prepare PgOSM-Flex

The PgOSM-Flex styles from this project are required to run the following.
Clone the repo and change into the directory containing
the `.lua` and `.sql` scripts.


```bash
mkdir ~/git
cd ~/git
git clone https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex.git
cd pgosm-flex/flex-config
```


## Set PgOSM variables

*(Recommended)* 

Set the `PGOSM_DATE` and `PGOSM_REGION` env vars to indicate the
date and region of the downloaded OpenStreetMap data.
This data is saved in the `osm.pgosm_flex` table to allow end users in the resulting
data to know what each dataset should contain.


```bash
export PGOSM_DATE='2021-03-14'
export PGOSM_REGION='north-america/us--district-of-columbia'
```

These values show up in the `osm.pgosm_flex` table.

```sql
SELECT osm_date, region FROM osm.pgosm_flex;
```

```bash
┌────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  osm_date  │                 region                 │
╞════════════╪════════════════════════════════════════╡
│ 2021-03-14 │ north-america/us--district-of-columbia │
└────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

> Note:  See the [Customize PgOSM on the main README.md](https://github.com/rustprooflabs/pgosm-flex#customize-pgosm) for all runtime customization options.


## Run osm2pgsql w/ PgOSM-Flex

The `run-all.lua` script provides the most complete set of OpenStreetMap
data.  The list of main tables in PgOSM-Flex will continue to grow and evolve.



```bash
cd pgosm-flex/flex-config

osm2pgsql --output=flex --style=./run.lua \
    -d $PGOSM_CONN \
    ~/pgosm-data/district-of-columbia-latest.osm.pbf
```

## Run post-processing SQL

Each `.lua` script as an associated `.sql` script to create 
primary keys, indexes, comments, views and more.


```bash
lua ./run-sql.lua
```

> Note: The `run-all` scripts exclude `unitable` and `road_major`.

## Config Layerset

Define `PGOSM_LAYERSET` to override the use of `layerset/default.ini`.

```bash
export PGOSM_LAYERSET=everything
```

To define a path to custom layersets outside the standard path
set the `PGOSM_LAYERSET_PATH` env var.

NOTE: Include the trailing slash!

```bash
export PGOSM_LAYERSET_PATH=/custom-layerset/
```

Read more about layersets in [LAYERSETS.md](LAYERSETS.md).



## Generated nested place polygons

*(Recommended)*

The post-processing SQL scripts create a procedure to calculate the nested place polygon data.  It does not run by default in the previous step because it can be expensive (slow) on large regions.


```bash
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CALL osm.populate_place_polygon_nested();"
psql -d $PGOSM_CONN -c "CALL osm.build_nested_admin_polygons();"
```


# More options




## Additional structure and helper data

**Optional**

Deploying the additional table structure is done via [sqitch](https://sqitch.org/).

Assumes this repo is cloned under `~/git/pgosm-flex/` and a local Postgres
DB named `pgosm` has been created with the `postgis` extension installed.

```bash
cd ~/git/pgosm-flex/db
sqitch deploy db:pg:pgosm
```

With the structures created, load helper road data.

```bash
cd ~/git/pgosm-flex/db
psql -d pgosm -f data/roads-us.sql
```


Currently only U.S. region drafted, more regions with local `maxspeed` are welcome via PR!


## Customize PgOSM Flex

Track additional details in the `osm.pgosm_meta` table (see more below)
and customize behavior with the use of environment variables.

* `OSM_DATE`
* `PGOSM_SRID`
* `PGOSM_REGION`
* `PGOSM_LANGUAGE`


### Custom SRID

To use `SRID 4326` instead of the default `SRID 3857`, set the `PGOSM_SRID`
environment variable before running osm2pgsql.

```bash
export PGOSM_SRID=4326
```

Changes to the SRID are reflected in output printed.

```bash
2021-01-08 15:01:15  osm2pgsql version 1.4.0 (1.4.0-72-gc3eb0fb6)
2021-01-08 15:01:15  Database version: 13.1 (Ubuntu 13.1-1.pgdg20.10+1)
2021-01-08 15:01:15  Node-cache: cache=800MB, maxblocks=12800*65536, allocation method=11
Custom SRID: 4326
...
```

### Preferred Language

The `name` column throughout PgOSM-Flex defaults to using the highest priority
name tag according to the [OSM Wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Names). Setting `PGOSM_LANGUAGE` allows giving preference to name tags with the
given language.
The value of `PGOSM_LANGUAGE` should match the codes used by OSM:

> where code is a lowercase language's ISO 639-1 alpha2 code, or a lowercase ISO 639-2 code if an ISO 639-1 code doesn't exist." -- [Multilingual names on OSM Wiki](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Multilingual_names)


```bash
export PGOSM_LANGUAGE=kn
```


## Troubleshooting

There are a lot of moving parts in this process.
This section is a collection of troubleshooting notes related to running PgOSM Flex
and osm2pgsql manually.


### Error in osm2pgsql processing

A variety of issues can create problems in the osm2pgsql processing step.
The following is a generic list of things to check for the most common issues.
Please check the [documentation on osm2pgsql.org](https://osm2pgsql.org/) for
the latest documented functionality.

* Check `osm2pgsql --version`, typically the latest version is assumed
* Does your `.osm.pbf` file exist in the correct location?
* Does the database user have proper [permissisions in Postgres](POSTGRES-PERMISSIONS.md)?



### Too many Postgres connections

Using osm2pgsql opens a number of connections to the Postgres database. The
number of connections opened depends on two factors:  # of tables, and create/update mode.
You know you have encountered this problem if you get an error message such as
`ERROR: Connecting to database failed: connection to server at "localhost" (127.0.0.1), port 5432 failed: FATAL:  sorry, too many clients already`.


The osm2pgsql docs [document the number of connections](https://osm2pgsql.org/doc/manual.html#number-of-connections).  PgOSM Flex's default layerset creates 41
tables.  This means running in create mode (fresh import) will require at least
44 connections to Postgres.  Update mode (via `osm2pgsql-replication`) creates
a minimum of 208 connections to Postgres.


Using [pgBouncer](https://www.pgbouncer.org/) or another connection pool
in front of Postgres is recommended.
